DAEDALUS: economic variables
================
15 June, 2023







- <a href="#1-introduction" id="toc-1-introduction">1 Introduction</a>
- <a href="#2-methods" id="toc-2-methods">2 Methods</a>
  - <a href="#21-scenarios" id="toc-21-scenarios">2.1 Scenarios</a>
  - <a href="#22-outcomes" id="toc-22-outcomes">2.2 Outcomes</a>
  - <a href="#23-modelling" id="toc-23-modelling">2.3 Modelling</a>
    - <a href="#231-data-sources" id="toc-231-data-sources">2.3.1 Data
      sources</a>
  - <a href="#24-value-of-information" id="toc-24-value-of-information">2.4
    Value of information</a>
- <a href="#3-results" id="toc-3-results">3 Results</a>
  - <a href="#31-distributions-over-outcomes"
    id="toc-31-distributions-over-outcomes">3.1 Distributions over
    outcomes</a>
  - <a href="#32-value-of-information" id="toc-32-value-of-information">3.2
    Value of information</a>
- <a href="#4-conclusions" id="toc-4-conclusions">4 Conclusions</a>
  - <a href="#41-the-modelling-framework"
    id="toc-41-the-modelling-framework">4.1 The modelling framework</a>
  - <a href="#42-the-economic-model" id="toc-42-the-economic-model">4.2 The
    economic model</a>
- <a href="#5-references" id="toc-5-references">5 References</a>
- <a href="#6-pathogen-profiles" id="toc-6-pathogen-profiles">6 Pathogen
  profiles</a>
- <a href="#7-economic-configurations"
  id="toc-7-economic-configurations">7 Economic configurations</a>
- <a href="#8-methodological-developments-specific-to-this-application"
  id="toc-8-methodological-developments-specific-to-this-application">8
  Methodological developments specific to this application</a>
  - <a href="#81-impact-of-tourism" id="toc-81-impact-of-tourism">8.1 Impact
    of tourism</a>
    - <a href="#811-food-and-accommodation-services-sector"
      id="toc-811-food-and-accommodation-services-sector">8.1.1 Food and
      accommodation services sector</a>
    - <a href="#812-sector-shrinkage-as-a-result-of-the-pandemic"
      id="toc-812-sector-shrinkage-as-a-result-of-the-pandemic">8.1.2 Sector
      shrinkage as a result of the pandemic</a>
    - <a href="#813-loss-of-international-tourists"
      id="toc-813-loss-of-international-tourists">8.1.3 Loss of international
      tourists</a>
    - <a href="#814-dependence-on-international-tourism"
      id="toc-814-dependence-on-international-tourism">8.1.4 Dependence on
      international tourism</a>
  - <a href="#82-sampling-sector-sizes"
    id="toc-82-sampling-sector-sizes">8.2 Sampling sector sizes</a>
  - <a href="#83-impact-of-sector-sizes"
    id="toc-83-impact-of-sector-sizes">8.3 Impact of sector sizes</a>
  - <a href="#84-internet-infrastructure"
    id="toc-84-internet-infrastructure">8.4 Internet infrastructure</a>
    - <a href="#841-remote-teaching" id="toc-841-remote-teaching">8.4.1 Remote
      teaching</a>
  - <a href="#85-hospital-capacity" id="toc-85-hospital-capacity">8.5
    Hospital capacity</a>
- <a
  href="#9-comparison-of-model-results-for-sars-cov-2-pre-alpha-to-2020-data"
  id="toc-9-comparison-of-model-results-for-sars-cov-2-pre-alpha-to-2020-data">9
  Comparison of model results for SARS-CoV-2 (pre-Alpha) to 2020 data</a>
  - <a href="#91-gdp-loss" id="toc-91-gdp-loss">9.1 GDP loss</a>
  - <a href="#92-school-closure" id="toc-92-school-closure">9.2 School
    closure</a>
  - <a href="#93-value-of-lives-lost" id="toc-93-value-of-lives-lost">9.3
    Value of lives lost</a>
- <a href="#10-pathogen-profiles" id="toc-10-pathogen-profiles">10
  Pathogen profiles</a>
  - <a href="#101-parameters-from-pandemic-potential-plus-seven-p2-profiles"
    id="toc-101-parameters-from-pandemic-potential-plus-seven-p2-profiles">10.1
    Parameters from Pandemic Potential, plus seven P2 profiles</a>
  - <a href="#102-infection-hospitalisation-rate-ihr"
    id="toc-102-infection-hospitalisation-rate-ihr">10.2
    Infection-hospitalisation rate (IHR)</a>
  - <a href="#103-hospital-fatality-rate-hfr"
    id="toc-103-hospital-fatality-rate-hfr">10.3 Hospital-fatality rate
    (HFR)</a>
- <a href="#11-population-health" id="toc-11-population-health">11
  Population health</a>
- <a href="#12-hospital-fatality-rate"
  id="toc-12-hospital-fatality-rate">12 Hospital fatality rate</a>

# 1 Introduction

The objective of the proposed work is to use scenario modelling to
ascertain the vulnerability of a country to a hypothetical pandemic
across several dimensions. The dimensions of vulnerability we consider
here include economic loss, life loss, and education loss. The variables
we consider as potential indicators of vulnerability relate to the
reliance of the economy on two economic sectors, and the level of
digitization and associated capacity to provide home-based work and
education.

We simulate hypothetical pandemics caused by one of seven respiratory
pathogens, each with a disease profile informed by a past epidemic. We
use the integrated epi-econ model DAEDALUS developed in our group for
estimating the benefit of pandemic preparedness (P2) (Haw et al. 2022).
The scenarios are informed by real-world demographic, societal and
economic data for up to 197 countries. We evaluate outcomes for four
mitigation strategies (“unmitigated”, “adaptive economic closures”,
“school closures”, and “elimination”).

The impacts we project are losses to life, to education, and to GDP. We
assess the impacts of the four variables of interest on the outcomes
using value-of-information methods in order to identify which variables
most influence outcomes, and in what circumstances.

# 2 Methods

## 2.1 Scenarios

The seven pathogen profiles include influenza and coronaviruses, and are
based on past epidemics. Influenza virus profiles correspond to
pandemics of the years 1918, 1957 and 2009. Coronavirus profiles
correspond to SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2, with three profiles: one,
corresponding to variants that predated the variant-of-concern
nomenclature (which we label “pre-Alpha”), and one each for the Delta
and Omicron variants.

The four mitigation strategies are “unmitigated”, “adaptive economic
closures”, “school closures”, and “elimination”. In the unmitigated
strategy, no aversive actions are taken. With adaptive economic
closures, sectors close according to a pre-specified programme when
hospital occupancy approaches its capacity. With school closures,
schools remain closed and other economic sectors have reduced
operations. With the elimination strategy, stringent economic closures
are maintained until case numbers can be contained by a testing
programme. All economic configuration profiles are based on GVA profiles
observed in 2020 (OECD), where the monthly GVA of a sector relative to
its value one year prior is interpreted as the degree to which it was
open.

We consider three stylised “countries” and parametrise models using data
from constituent countries according to the World Bank
income-classification categories:

- LLMIC, using inputs from LICs and LMICs
- MIC, using inputs from LMICs and UMICs
- HIC, using inputs from HICs

## 2.2 Outcomes

The outcomes of the model are:

1.  Number of deaths (by four age groups)
2.  GDP loss
3.  Education loss

Numbers of deaths are translated into years of life lost (YLL). This
takes into account the life expectancy of each person who dies. YLLs are
valued using the value of a statistical life, which we estimate as being
160 times GDP per capita (Robinson, Hammitt, and O’Keeffe 2019).

GDP loss is estimated as the total GDP - the sum of GVA across all
sectors, scaled by how open they are across the year - divided by the
value of GDP when all sectors are completely open all the time.

Education loss takes into account the extent to which schools are
closed, as well as the effectiveness of provision for remote learning.
We estimate this using internet coverage as a proxy (that is, we do not
take into account education that can be delivered by TV or radio).
Education loss is valued by taking into consideration life-long earning
losses, following (Psacharopoulos, Collis, and Patrinos 2021).

We report these outcomes as a percentage of GDP (for the year prior to
the pandemic – here, 2019). All three outcomes (once a valuation is
applied) are linear functions of GDP, and therefore results are all
comparable across countries. The time horizon in the simulation is one
year.

## 2.3 Modelling

The integrated epi-econ model is used to project economic and epidemic
outcomes. The epidemiological model is a population-structured
compartmental SEIR model. It takes many inputs, including pathogen
natural history parameters (such as
R![\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?_0 "_0"), case-fatality
rates, etc) and population parameters (such as age structure, contact
rates, etc). The economic model takes as input the GVA per sector, which
uses the OECD classification of 45 economic sectors. Both models take as
input the economic configuration over time: this is the extent to which
each sector is open in each period. A sector is open to a maximum amount
of 100%, when its full monthly GVA value is realised. If a sector is
open to 50%, it contributes 50% of its maximum GVA for that period. In
the epidemic model, contacts associated with that sector – between
workers, from workers to consumers, and between consumers – are likewise
scaled down.

The economic model is very simple: we do not model interdependencies
between sectors, and the only way in which country interdependencies are
taken into account is via changes to tourism which manifest in the “food
and accommodation services” sector (see Section
<a href="#impact-of-tourism"><strong>??</strong></a>). We do not model
seasonality or allow for sectors to grow (either in GDP or in
workforce).

We generate a distribution over outcomes through sampling inputs. This
distribution represents a catalogue of synthetic countries whose
characteristics are randomly taken from candidate countries. By
examining the relationships between inputs and outputs, we can identify
the inputs that most drive uncertainty in outputs as encoded by our
model or, equivalently, which inputs are the best predictors of the
outcome(s), independently of all other variables.

We include uncertainty in as many parameters as possible. We sample from
specified distributions, or sample with replacement from a discrete set
of candidate options, where the candidate options are the values
belonging to countries in the income group.

Parameter distributions are independent of each other (with the
exception of loss in tourism, where the size of the sector is related to
the fraction of tourism that comes in from abroad (see Section
<a href="#loss-of-international-tourists"><strong>??</strong></a>)).
This means that any relationships we uncover between input and output
within an income group will be causal, and we will not discover any
factors that are “indicative” by association. (Between income groups
there are many systematic differences in inputs and learning which of
those drives the differences in outcomes is part of the ongoing
development of the model.)

### 2.3.1 Data sources

1.  Workforce: ILO
2.  GVA: OECD
3.  Closure configurations: GVA 2020 for UK, Australia, Indonesia (OECD)
4.  Contact matrices: (Prem et al. 2021), (Béraud et al. 2015)
5.  Work from home: (Gottlieb et al. 2021)
6.  Hospital capacity: World Bank / OECD
7.  Response time: Blavatnik 2022
8.  Testing rate:
9.  Testing start time:
10. Mobility: Our World in Data/Wang et al., 2022
11. Life expectancy: IHME?
12. Population:
13. Tourism data:
    <https://www.unwto.org/tourism-data/international-tourism-and-covid-19>
14. International tourism:
    <https://www.unwto.org/tourism-statistics/key-tourism-statistics>
15. Internet coverage: World Bank
16. Labour share of GDP: (Inklaar and Timmer 2013)

## 2.4 Value of information

We assess the impacts of four parameters that relate to economic
indicators:

1.  Agricultural GVA as a proportion of GDP
2.  Tourism GVA as a proportion of GDP
3.  Proportional of tourism that comes from abroad
4.  Internet coverage

We use value-of-information methods to quantify these relationships.
Specifically, we estimate the expected value of partial perfect
information (EVPPI), which is the expected gain (in terms of reduction
of uncertainty in the outcome) of knowing a parameter (or set of
parameters) perfectly (Jackson et al. 2021). Equivalently, and in terms
of identifying indicators of vulnerability, it tells us which parameters
best predict the outcome.

Value of information is a decision-theoretic quantity. We estimate it
using the R package **voi**. Intuitively, EVPPI functions in a similar
way to correlation. In the case of a linear relationship between one
input and one output, the computation of EVPPI is essentially the same
as that of a correlation. EVPPI extends a simple correlation analysis in
two ways relevant to the results presented: 1) nonlinear relationships
are also captured, and 2) we can assess the EVPPI of a set of
parameters. EVPPI allows us to identify influential parameters. Once
identified, relationships between the influential parameter (sets) and
outcomes need to be examined independently in order to understand the
nature of the relationship.

Finally, we can use mutual information (MI, via the R package
**infotheo**) to assess mutual information between inputs and outputs.
What MI offers beyond EVPPI is that it takes into account also how
*likely* it is that the input parameter occupies a space where it is
influential.

# 3 Results

## 3.1 Distributions over outcomes

Distributions over costs associated with the first year of an outbreak
of SARS-CoV-2 (with parameters corresponding to variants arising before
alpha) are shown in Figure <a href="#fig:prealpha">3.1</a> for three
income levels and four mitigation strategies. Each shape represents the
probability density made up of the sampled values for outcomes: the most
likely value to take is where the figure is widest. The tip of the tail
indicates the highest value sampled, after which point the density is 0.

These distributions show that vulnerability to a pandemic depends on a
country’s income level together with its mitigation strategy. For
example, the elimination strategy appears to have the lowest
distribution for overall cost for HICs among all strategies, whereas it
appears no lower for MICs and perhaps higher for LLMICs. This will be
because of the factors that vary systematically across countries of
different income levels. Likewise, the heavier tails in the
distributions for YLLs for HICs is likely due to the age distributions
in HICs being heavier in older ages. These cross-country differences are
one of the focuses of the development of the model.

![Figure 3.1: Model results for pre-Alpha variants of
SARS-CoV-2.](p2_files/figure-gfm/prealpha-1.png)

|     Strategy      | Income group | Total costs     |      YLLs       |   Education    |      GDP       |
|:-----------------:|:------------:|:----------------|:---------------:|:--------------:|:--------------:|
|    No Closures    |    LLMIC     | 57.1 (0, 410.8) |  54 (0, 403.8)  |  0.4 (0, 1.3)  | 2.7 (0, 11.3)  |
|  School Closures  |    LLMIC     | 68.3 (0, 388.2) | 39.7 (0, 332.3) | 24.2 (0, 84.5) | 4.4 (0, 17.1)  |
| Economic Closures |    LLMIC     | 57.9 (0, 356.2) | 31.9 (0, 285.8) | 15.4 (0, 68.1) | 10.5 (0, 31.4) |
|    Elimination    |    LLMIC     | 63.7 (0, 355.4) |  31 (0, 285.4)  |  20.6 (0, 77)  | 12.1 (0, 33.1) |
|    No Closures    |     MIC      | 55.9 (0, 389)   | 53.7 (0, 383.2) |  0.2 (0, 0.7)  |   2 (0, 7.4)   |
|  School Closures  |     MIC      | 54.7 (0, 343.8) | 38.8 (0, 304.6) |  12 (0, 46.7)  | 3.9 (0, 13.7)  |
| Economic Closures |     MIC      | 46.4 (0, 301.6) | 30.6 (0, 255.4) | 6.8 (0, 33.6)  |  9 (0, 29.4)   |
|    Elimination    |     MIC      | 54 (0, 296.7)   | 27.8 (0, 247.5) | 12.6 (0, 43.6) | 13.6 (0, 31.5) |
|    No Closures    |     HIC      | 44.3 (0, 352.3) | 42.7 (0, 347.6) |   0 (0, 0.1)   |  1.6 (0, 5.8)  |
|  School Closures  |     HIC      | 31.8 (0, 227.6) | 26.1 (0, 211.2) | 2.8 (0, 11.2)  |  3 (0, 10.4)   |
| Economic Closures |     HIC      | 26.1 (0, 165)   | 18.6 (0, 138.7) |  1.2 (0, 7.3)  | 6.3 (0, 26.2)  |
|    Elimination    |     HIC      | 28.6 (0, 154.7) | 12.4 (0, 121.8) |  3.3 (0, 11)   | 12.9 (0, 29.9) |

Results for all scenarios shown. Mean values and 95% prediction
intervals.)

“If a hypothetical low- or lower-middle income country that relies to 3%
on tourism for their national income experienced a pandemic with a
similar profile to the Spanish Flu, what would be the number of deaths,
the loss in GDP, and the loss of in-person schooling were the country to
rely on an elimination strategy? What would the impact be if the country
relied to 6% on tourism?”

At 3%, life-year loss is expected to be 30.64% of GDP (95%PI 0, 301.53).
Education loss is expected to be 20.47% of GDP (95%PI 0, 82.25). GDP
loss is expected to be 10.7% of GDP (95%PI 0, 29.88).

At 6%, life-year loss is expected to be 26.45% of GDP (95%PI 0, 221.78).
Education loss is expected to be 20.21% of GDP (95%PI 0, 72.5). GDP loss
is expected to be 12.55% of GDP (95%PI 0, 31.05).

Here, the uncertainty in model results swamps the difference in expected
values across all outcomes.

## 3.2 Value of information

The value of information associated with a number of parameters for all
costs considered is shown in Figure <a href="#fig:voi">3.2</a>. The
costs are listed down the y axis. Parameters and parameter groups are
along the x axis. Colours indicate the extent to which uncertainty in
the input(s) are driving uncertainty in the outcome, with lighter
colours representing greater impact.

The first four items on the x axis are the four independent variables:
size of the agriculture sector, size of the food and accommodation
services sector, fraction of tourism coming from abroad, and internet
coverage. While the two parameters driving tourism are impactful on GDP
loss, particularly for strategies light on economic closures, they have
little impact on total costs. (This relationship is also driven by the
distribution of the food and accommodation sector contribution to GVA:
the mutual information appears a more balanced metric (Figure
<a href="#fig:mi">3.3</a>).) Meanwhile, internet coverage has modest
impacts, particularly on education loss and for strategies that employ
school closures.

The EVPPI (and MI) for tourism is high, particularly for lower-income
countries because tourism can make up a large part of GDP, and
particularly for strategies light on economic closure because then the
only sector suffering a shortfall is the Food and accommodation services
sector.

The next two items on the x axis are parameter groups. First, both
sectors. Second, both tourism parameters. The grouping of parameters
shows their combined impact on outcomes, which can be greater than the
sum of their individual impacts.

The next columns do not correspond to the “independent variables” of
interest but might be expected to influence outcomes: fraction of
population who are school age, fraction of population who are in the
oldest age group, population size, rate of testing, GDP,
![R_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?R_0 "R_0") and maximum
hospital capacity.
![R_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?R_0 "R_0") in particular
drives a lot of uncertainty in costs, primarily through YLLs.

The final four items on the x axis are groups of variables: both age
groups; two social-distancing parameters; hospital capacity, the
fraction of the population aged 65 and over, and
R![\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?_0 "_0"); and testing
parameters, response time, and
R![\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?_0 "_0").

Some distributions in Figure <a href="#fig:prealpha">3.1</a> are
bimodal. For example, GDP loss under the Economic Closures strategy have
peaks in density close to zero and also far from zero, with a
low-density region in between. Here, in some samples (low GDP loss), the
epidemic was not severe enough to warrant closures. This could be
because R![\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?_0 "_0") was low,
because hospital capacity was high, or both. Similarly, under the
Elimination strategy, there is an area of high density at higher costs
where the strategy does not work: due to
R![\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?_0 "_0") being high, and/or
the capacity to test being low, case numbers are not brought low enough
and severe economic closures persist throughout, leading to high GDP
loss.

These relationships are identified in the value-of-information analyses:
the last two columns show value of information for
R![\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?_0 "_0"), fraction of
population aged 65 and over and hospital capacity combined, and
R![\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?_0 "_0"), testing
parameters and social-distancing parameters combined. These variables
together explain much of the variance in GDP loss for the Economic
Closures and Elimination strategies, respectively.

![Figure 3.2: Value of information for pre-Alpha variants of SARS-CoV-2.
First four columns: individual parameters of interest (agricultural
sector as % of GDP, Food and accommodation services sector as % of GDP,
international tourism as % of toursim, internet coverage). Next two
columns: pairs of parameters of interest (both sectors, both
tourism-related parameters). Next 11 columns: other random variables
(fraction of population school age, fraction of population age 65 and
over, population size, GDP, hospital capacity, testing rate, testing
start time, government response time, social distancing minimum, social
distancing responsiveness to case numbers,
R![\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?_0 "_0")). Final four
columns: combinations of random variables (both age fractions, both
social distancing parameters, hospital capacity + elders population +
R![\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?_0 "_0"), testing
parameters + social distancing parameters +
R![\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?_0 "_0")).](p2_files/figure-gfm/voi-1.png)

![Figure 3.3: Mutual information (MI) for pre-Alpha variants of
SARS-CoV-2.](p2_files/figure-gfm/mi-1.png)

To understand the relationship between a parameter and an outcome,
e.g. whether the relationship is linear and increasing or decreasing,
whether it is nonlinear, whether it is driven by extreme values, they
must be plotted against each other. Likewise, a relationship between a
parameter pair and an outcome can be plotted, e.g. Figure
<a href="#fig:tourismgdp">3.6</a>: for middle-income countries in a
pre-Alpha SARS-CoV-2 pandemic with the “No Closures” strategy, GDP loss
is greatest when both the food and accommodation services GVA as
fraction of GDP and international tourism as a fraction of tourism are
high.

![Figure 3.4: Relationship between internet coverage and education
losses for middle-income countries in a Delta SARS-CoV-2 pandemic with
the “School Closures” strategy.](p2_files/figure-gfm/interneted-1.png)

![Figure 3.5: Relationship between the “tourism sector” size and GDP
loss for middle-income countries in a pre-Alpha SARS-CoV-2 pandemic with
the “No Closures” strategy.](p2_files/figure-gfm/tourismsecgdp-1.png)

![Figure 3.6: Relationship between tourism parameters and GDP loss for
middle-income countries in a pre-Alpha SARS-CoV-2 pandemic with the “No
Closures” strategy.](p2_files/figure-gfm/tourismgdp-1.png)

# 4 Conclusions

Using simulation modelling, we have projected distributions of epidemic
losses – of life, GDP, and education – for seven pathogenic profiles,
four stylised mitigation strategies, and three levels of country income.
We assessed what the impact is of four economic variables in our model:
fraction of GDP from the agriculture sector, fraction of GDP from the
food and accommodation services sector, fraction of tourism that comes
from abroad, and internet coverage.

We found that the tourism-related variables impacted GDP loss for the No
Closure strategy, which is because GDP losses will be suffered only in
this sector when there is no mandated closure. This means the GDP loss
will depend on the extent to which the economy is depending on this
sector. We found that Education losses depend to some extent on internet
coverage, because our model assumes that internet access can be used to
mitigate losses by enabling remote learning. We found little effect of
the size of the agricultural sector.

In parallel, we present a selection of other model parameters, including
those related to demography (e.g. the fraction of the population who are
of school age), to the economy (e.g. GDP), to the health system
(e.g. hospital capacity), to the pandemic response (e.g. the rate of
testing), and to the pathogen (e.g. the basic reproductive number,
R![\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?_0 "_0")). We found that
these variables – in combinations up to four – account for much of the
variability in outcomes.

## 4.1 The modelling framework

Ours is a mechanistic simulation model. The model encodes complex
relationships between demographic, epidemic and economic variables. With
simulation, it allows us to explore outcomes as consequences of inputs
using information- and decision-theoretic methods. Modelling allows *in
silico* experimentation, which is crucial for questions pertaining to
rare events with small and confounded datasets, as cross-sectional
country data are. The model allows us to ask questions about cause and
effect that cannot be asked in reality and rarely can be inferred from
observational data.

The challenge we face with modelling, then, is to be confident that our
model mimics reality, or at least captures the elements with which we
are concerned.

## 4.2 The economic model

We have used a simple economic model that allows us to estimate GDP loss
in a year assuming that sector closures follow mandates. The mandates we
use are schematic and representative of GVA profiles seen in different
countries in 2020.

The economic model is static, and does not take into account any
dynamics such as feedback, changes to demand, supply and supply chains,
changes in international trade, or any macroeconomic factors. As such,
to model longer-term economic impacts (apart from the impact of lost
education) is beyond the scope of this model.

For example, Figure <a href="#fig:gdpdata2">4.1</a> shows the
relationship between GDP loss in the first year (2020) and GDP loss in
the second year (2021) following the outbreak of COVID-19. There is
heterogeneity in losses in the first year, but also in whether or not
the economy recovers in the second year, and to what extent. The
recovery is arguably a more important phenomenon to capture than initial
losses, and it is not something that can be captured by our economic
model. However, a model of recovery / future losses would include
initial loss as an input, which our model could provide.

![Figure 4.1: GDP loss and recovery. On the x axis is the GDP of 2020
relative to its 2019 projected value (IMF). On the y axis is 2021 GDP
relative to its 2019 projected value relative to the same value for 2020
(ratio of ratios). x values below 100 represent a loss in the year 2020.
y values above 0 represent recovery (i.e. growth exceeded what was
expected in 2019); y values equal to zero represent a fixed level of
loss; y values less than zero represent increasing
loss.](p2_files/figure-gfm/gdpdata2-1.png)

(confirm with Patrick) GVA for a sector is reduced as a consequence of
illness and death of workers, but not due to a reduction in demand
(e.g. private/final consumption).

# 5 References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-Beraud2015" class="csl-entry">

Béraud, Guillaume, Sabine Kazmercziak, Philippe Beutels, Daniel
Levy-Bruhl, Xavier Lenne, Nathalie Mielcarek, Yazdan Yazdanpanah, Pierre
Yves Boëlle, Niel Hens, and Benoit Dervaux. 2015. “<span
class="nocase">The French connection: The first large population-based
contact survey in France relevant for the spread of infectious
diseases</span>.” *PLoS ONE* 10 (7): 1–22.
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0133203>.

</div>

<div id="ref-Fraser2009" class="csl-entry">

Fraser, Christophe, Christl A Donnelly, Simon Cauchemez, William P
Hanage, Maria D Van Kerkhove, T Déirdre Hollingsworth, Jamie Griffin, et
al. 2009. “<span class="nocase">Pandemic potential of a strain of
Influenza A (H1N1): Early findings</span>.” *Science* 324: 1557–62.

</div>

<div id="ref-Gottlieb2021" class="csl-entry">

Gottlieb, Charles, Jan Grobovšek, Markus Poschke, and Fernando Saltiel.
2021. “<span class="nocase">Working from home in developing
countries</span>.” *European Economic Review* 133: 103679.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2021.103679>.

</div>

<div id="ref-Haw2020" class="csl-entry">

Haw, David, Giovanni Forchini, Patrick Doohan, Paula Christen, Matteo
Pianella, Rob Johnson, Sumali Bajaj, et al. 2022. “<span
class="nocase">Optimizing social and economic activity while containing
SARS-CoV-2 transmission using DAEDALUS</span>.” *Nature Computational
Science* 2: 223–33. <https://doi.org/10.25561/83928>.

</div>

<div id="ref-Inklaar2013" class="csl-entry">

Inklaar, Robert, and M Timmer. 2013. “<span class="nocase">Capital,
Labor and TFP in PWT8. 0</span>.” University of Groningen.
<http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/files/InklaarTimmer13.pdf>.

</div>

<div id="ref-Jackson2021" class="csl-entry">

Jackson, Christopher, Robert Johnson, Audrey De Nazelle, Rahul Goel,
Thiago Hérick De Sá, Marko Tainio, and James Woodcock. 2021. “<span
class="nocase">A guide to value of information methods for prioritising
research in health impact modelling</span>.” *Epidemiologic Methods* 10
(1): 1–22. <https://doi.org/10.1515/em-2021-0012>.

</div>

<div id="ref-NationalEconomicandDevelopmentAuthority2021"
class="csl-entry">

National Economic and Development Authority. 2021. “<span
class="nocase">COVID-19 pandemic to cost PHP 41.4 T for the next 40
years</span>.” National Economic; Development Authority.
<https://neda.gov.ph/covid-19-pandemic-to-cost-php-41-4-t-for-the-next-40-years-neda/>.

</div>

<div id="ref-Prem2021" class="csl-entry">

Prem, Kiesha, Kevin van Zandvoort, Petra Klepac, Rosalind M. Eggo,
Nicholas G. Davies, Alex R. Cook, and Mark Jit. 2021. “<span
class="nocase">Projecting contact matrices in 177 geographical regions:
An update and comparison with empirical data for the COVID-19
era</span>.” *PLoS Computational Biology* 17 (7).
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009098>.

</div>

<div id="ref-Psacharopoulos2021a" class="csl-entry">

Psacharopoulos, George, Victoria; Collis, and Patrinos. 2021. “<span
class="nocase">The COVID-19 Cost of School Closures in Earnings and
Income across the World</span>.” *Comparative Education Review* 65 (2).

</div>

<div id="ref-Robinson2019" class="csl-entry">

Robinson, Lisa A., James K. Hammitt, and Lucy O’Keeffe. 2019. “<span
class="nocase">Valuing mortality risk reductions in global benefit-cost
analysis</span>.” *Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis* 10: 15–50.
<https://doi.org/10.1017/bca.2018.26>.

</div>

</div>

# 6 Pathogen profiles

|                                      | SARS | Flu2009 | Flu1957 | Flu1918 | CovidWT | CovidOM | CovidDE |
|:------------------------------------:|:----:|:-------:|:-------:|:-------:|:-------:|:-------:|:-------:|
|         **IHR, ages 0-4, %**         | 5.8  |  0.47   |  0.09   |   12    | 0.0016  | 0.0033  |  0.003  |
|         **IHR, ages 5-9, %**         | 5.8  |  0.18   |  0.09   |   2.1   | 0.0016  | 0.0033  |  0.003  |
|        **IHR, ages 10-14, %**        | 5.8  |  0.18   |  0.09   |   2.6   |  0.041  |  0.059  |  0.075  |
|        **IHR, ages 15-19, %**        | 5.8  |  0.18   |  0.09   |   5.3   |  0.041  |  0.059  |  0.075  |
|        **IHR, ages 20-24, %**        | 8.2  |  0.18   |  0.09   |   9.1   |    1    |  0.83   |   1.9   |
|        **IHR, ages 25-29, %**        | 8.2  |  0.38   |  0.09   |   16    |    1    |  0.83   |   1.9   |
|        **IHR, ages 30-34, %**        | 8.2  |  0.38   |  0.09   |   13    |   3.4   |    2    |   6.3   |
|        **IHR, ages 35-39, %**        | 8.2  |  0.38   |  0.09   |   12    |   3.4   |    2    |   6.3   |
|        **IHR, ages 40-44, %**        |  30  |  0.38   |  0.09   |   8.8   |   4.2   |   1.6   |   7.9   |
|        **IHR, ages 45-49, %**        |  30  |  0.38   |   2.3   |   6.4   |   4.2   |   1.6   |   7.9   |
|        **IHR, ages 50-54, %**        |  30  |  0.71   |   2.3   |   8.8   |   8.2   |   2.1   |   15    |
|        **IHR, ages 55-59, %**        |  30  |  0.71   |   2.3   |   6.3   |   8.2   |   2.1   |   15    |
|        **IHR, ages 60-64, %**        |  87  |  0.71   |   2.3   |   16    |   12    |   3.1   |   22    |
|        **IHR, ages 65-69, %**        |  87  |    1    |   18    |   22    |   12    |   3.1   |   22    |
|        **IHR, ages 70-74, %**        |  87  |    1    |   18    |   26    |   17    |   6.1   |   31    |
|        **IHR, ages 75-79, %**        |  87  |    1    |   18    |   26    |   17    |   6.1   |   31    |
|        **IHR, ages 80-+, %**         |  60  |    1    |   18    |   26    |   18    |   11    |   34    |
|         **IFR, ages 0-4, %**         | 1.5  |  0.018  | 0.0067  |   1.5   | 0.0016  | 0.0033  |  0.003  |
|         **IFR, ages 5-9, %**         | 1.5  | 0.0074  | 0.0067  |  0.27   | 0.0016  | 0.0033  |  0.003  |
|        **IFR, ages 10-14, %**        | 1.5  | 0.0074  | 0.0067  |  0.32   |  0.007  |  0.01   |  0.013  |
|        **IFR, ages 15-19, %**        | 1.5  |  0.008  | 0.0067  |  0.66   |  0.007  |  0.01   |  0.013  |
|        **IFR, ages 20-24, %**        | 2.1  |  0.008  | 0.0067  |   1.1   |  0.031  |  0.025  |  0.057  |
|        **IFR, ages 25-29, %**        | 2.1  |  0.02   | 0.0067  |    2    |  0.031  |  0.025  |  0.057  |
|        **IFR, ages 30-34, %**        | 2.1  |  0.02   | 0.0067  |   1.7   |  0.084  |  0.048  |  0.16   |
|        **IFR, ages 35-39, %**        | 2.1  |  0.02   | 0.0067  |   1.5   |  0.084  |  0.048  |  0.16   |
|        **IFR, ages 40-44, %**        | 7.7  |  0.02   | 0.0067  |   1.1   |  0.16   |  0.06   |   0.3   |
|        **IFR, ages 45-49, %**        | 7.7  |  0.043  |  0.17   |   0.8   |  0.16   |  0.06   |   0.3   |
|        **IFR, ages 50-54, %**        | 7.7  |  0.043  |  0.17   |   1.1   |   0.6   |  0.15   |   1.1   |
|        **IFR, ages 55-59, %**        | 7.7  |  0.043  |  0.17   |  0.78   |   0.6   |  0.15   |   1.1   |
|        **IFR, ages 60-64, %**        |  22  |  0.043  |  0.17   |   2.1   |   1.9   |   0.5   |   3.6   |
|        **IFR, ages 65-69, %**        |  22  |  0.66   |   1.3   |   2.8   |   1.9   |   0.5   |   3.6   |
|        **IFR, ages 70-74, %**        |  22  |  0.66   |   1.3   |   3.3   |   4.3   |   1.6   |   7.9   |
|        **IFR, ages 75-79, %**        |  22  |  0.66   |   1.3   |   3.3   |   4.3   |   1.6   |   7.9   |
|        **IFR, ages 80-+, %**         |  15  |  0.66   |   1.3   |   3.3   |   7.8   |   4.8   |   14    |
|     **Probability asymptomatic**     | 0.87 |  0.67   |  0.67   |  0.67   |   0.6   |   0.6   |   0.6   |
|          **Latent period**           | 4.6  |   1.1   |   1.1   |   1.1   |   4.6   |    4    |    4    |
| **Time to recovery (asymptomatic)**  | 2.1  |   2.5   |   2.5   |   2.5   |   2.1   |   2.1   |   2.1   |
|  **Time to recovery (symptomatic)**  |  4   |   2.5   |   2.5   |   2.5   |    4    |    4    |    4    |
|     **Time to hospitalisation**      | 3.8  |   2.5   |   2.5   |   2.5   |    4    |    4    |    4    |
|   **Time to recovery (hospital)**    |  23  |    5    |    5    |    5    |   12    |   5.5   |   7.6   |
|          **Time to death**           |  20  |    5    |    5    |    5    |   12    |   5.5   |   7.6   |
|         **Immunity waning**          | 360  |   360   |   360   |   360   |   360   |   360   |   360   |
| **Reduced infectivity asymptomatic** | 0.58 |  0.58   |  0.58   |  0.58   |  0.58   |  0.58   |  0.58   |
|                **R0**                | 1.8  |   1.6   |   1.8   |   2.5   |   2.9   |   5.9   |   5.1   |

Pathogen profiles.

# 7 Economic configurations

|                                                           Sector                                                           | Elimination | Lockdown | Economic Closures | Lockdown (School Closures) | School Closures |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|:-----------:|:--------:|:-----------------:|:--------------------------:|:---------------:|
|                                               Agriculture, hunting, forestry                                               |     100     |    86    |        88         |            100             |       100       |
|                                                  Fishing and aquaculture                                                   |     100     |    86    |        88         |            100             |       100       |
|                                      Mining and quarrying, energy producing products                                       |     100     |    90    |        91         |             67             |       79        |
|                                    Mining and quarrying, non-energy producing products                                     |     100     |    90    |        91         |            100             |       100       |
|                                             Mining support service activities                                              |     100     |    90    |        91         |            100             |       100       |
|                                            Food products, beverages and tobacco                                            |     100     |    70    |        94         |            100             |       100       |
|                                      Textiles, textile products, leather and footwear                                      |     98      |    70    |        94         |             89             |       92        |
|                                             Wood and products of wood and cork                                             |     98      |    70    |        94         |            100             |       95        |
|                                                Paper products and printing                                                 |     98      |    70    |        94         |            100             |       98        |
|                                            Coke and refined petroleum products                                             |     88      |    70    |        94         |             87             |       88        |
|                                               Chemical and chemical products                                               |     88      |    70    |        94         |            100             |       100       |
|                                 Pharmaceuticals, medicinal chemical and botanical products                                 |     88      |    70    |        94         |            100             |       100       |
|                                                Rubber and plastics products                                                |     88      |    70    |        94         |             87             |       100       |
|                                            Other non-metallic mineral products                                             |     88      |    70    |        94         |             92             |       89        |
|                                                        Basic metals                                                        |     100     |    70    |        94         |            100             |       100       |
|                                                 Fabricated metal products                                                  |     100     |    70    |        94         |             90             |       100       |
|                                         Computer, electronic and optical equipment                                         |     100     |    70    |        94         |             90             |       100       |
|                                                    Electrical equipment                                                    |     100     |    70    |        94         |             90             |       100       |
|                                                Machinery and equipment, nec                                                |     100     |    70    |        94         |             89             |       95        |
|                                         Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers                                         |     100     |    70    |        94         |             66             |       82        |
|                                                 Other transport equipment                                                  |     100     |    70    |        94         |             66             |       82        |
|                           Manufacturing nec; repair and installation of machinery and equipment                            |     98      |    70    |        94         |             98             |       100       |
|                                    Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply                                     |     97      |    89    |        100        |             94             |       94        |
|                            Water supply; sewerage, waste management and remediation activities                             |     97      |    92    |        98         |            100             |       100       |
|                                                        Construction                                                        |     94      |    56    |        92         |             95             |       95        |
|                                    Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles                                    |     100     |    64    |        100        |             92             |       97        |
|                                         Land transport and transport via pipelines                                         |     100     |    63    |        82         |             83             |       100       |
|                                                      Water transport                                                       |     100     |    63    |        82         |             81             |       98        |
|                                                       Air transport                                                        |     18      |    63    |        82         |             16             |       42        |
|                                   Warehousing and support activities for transportation                                    |     91      |    63    |        82         |             64             |       91        |
|                                               Postal and courier activities                                                |     91      |    63    |        82         |             64             |       91        |
|                                         Accommodation and food service activities                                          |     92      |    10    |        85         |             77             |       91        |
|                                    Publishing, audiovisual and broadcasting activities                                     |     100     |    88    |        91         |            100             |       100       |
|                                                     Telecommunications                                                     |     100     |    88    |        91         |            100             |       100       |
|                                             IT and other information services                                              |     100     |    88    |        91         |            100             |       100       |
|                                             Financial and insurance activities                                             |     100     |    94    |        96         |            100             |       100       |
|                                                   Real estate activities                                                   |     100     |    98    |        98         |            100             |       100       |
|                                     Professional, scientific and technical activities                                      |     100     |    85    |        92         |             90             |       95        |
|                                            Administrative and support services                                             |     90      |    66    |        80         |             90             |       95        |
|                               Public administration and defence; compulsory social security                                |     100     |   100    |        100        |             96             |       100       |
|                                                         Education                                                          |     100     |    10    |        100        |             10             |       10        |
|                                          Human health and social work activities                                           |     100     |    75    |        92         |            100             |       100       |
|                                             Arts, entertainment and recreation                                             |     94      |    55    |        71         |             90             |       96        |
|                                                  Other service activities                                                  |     94      |    54    |        83         |             90             |       96        |
| Activities of households as employers; undifferentiated goods- and services-producing activities of households for own use |     94      |    49    |        53         |             90             |       96        |

Economic configurations used to implement strategies. Values are the
openness of the sector expressed as a percentage. Elimination values are
taken from Australia. Lockdown and Economic Closures values are taken
from the UK. School Closures values are taken from Indonesia.

# 8 Methodological developments specific to this application

This work is based on a model currently under development. In this
section we detail features added specifically to address the question of
what is the impact of certain parameters on outcomes as encoded by our
model.

## 8.1 Impact of tourism

### 8.1.1 Food and accommodation services sector

As there is no “tourism” sector in the 45-sector classification we are
using, to model the impact of changes to tourism, we identify the “Food
and accommodation services” sector with tourism. This is imperfect. The
correlation of their % contributions to GDP is 0.64 and the order of
magnitude is similar (1 to 7% vs 2 to 10% of GDP). The other two sectors
considered (Air transport and Arts, entertainment and recreation) have
little correlation with tourism in terms of % of GDP. (See Figure
<a href="#fig:pairs"><strong>??</strong></a>.)

<img src="p2_files/figure-gfm/pairs-1.png" title="Correlations between tourism-related data. First: https://www.unwto.org/tourism-statistics/key-tourism-statistics. Second to fourth: https://www.unwto.org/tourism-data/international-tourism-and-covid-19. Fifth to seventh: OECD." alt="Correlations between tourism-related data. First: https://www.unwto.org/tourism-statistics/key-tourism-statistics. Second to fourth: https://www.unwto.org/tourism-data/international-tourism-and-covid-19. Fifth to seventh: OECD." style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

### 8.1.2 Sector shrinkage as a result of the pandemic

For many countries, tourism was reduced not because of domestic mandates
but because of reduced international travel. Therefore, the fraction of
tourism that comes from abroad is a factor that can determine the impact
of a pandemic on a country’s GDP potentially independently of what
happens within the country. (A useful model extension would be to
include some dependence on country factors, e.g. case numbers.)

We model mitigation via business closures, which are mandated by sector.
We represent openness with values
![x](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?x "x") which range from 0 to
1, 1 representing maximum openness. To capture the impact of reduced
international travel, we set the maximum openness of the food and
accommodation services sector to be limited by international tourism as:

![x\_\tau = \min\\{\hat{x}\_\tau, 1+ y(z-1)\\}](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?x_%5Ctau%20%3D%20%5Cmin%5C%7B%5Chat%7Bx%7D_%5Ctau%2C%201%2B%20y%28z-1%29%5C%7D "x_\tau = \min\{\hat{x}_\tau, 1+ y(z-1)\}")

where
![\hat{x}\_\tau](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?%5Chat%7Bx%7D_%5Ctau "\hat{x}_\tau")
is the openness of the sector at time
![\tau](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?%5Ctau "\tau") according to
the schedule (i.e. the mitigation strategy),
![y](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?y "y") is the proportion of
tourism that is international, and
![z](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?z "z") is the fraction
international tourism reduces to as a consequence of the pandemic. I.e.
the tourism remaining is the domestic
(![1-y](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?1-y "1-y")) plus that that
comes in from abroad
(![yz](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?yz "yz")).

Therefore, the contribution of the GVA of the food and accommodation
services sector is limited either by the pandemic, or by the mitigation
measures - whichever is lower.

### 8.1.3 Loss of international tourists

We model the distribution of
![z](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?z "z") using data from 2020
(Figure <a href="#fig:tourismhist"><strong>??</strong></a>, bottom-right
plot). We fit to it a log-normal distribution, and find mean value -1.39
and standard deviation 0.39 (Figure
<a href="#fig:ytd"><strong>??</strong></a>). We use these values as
inputs for all country models.

<img src="p2_files/figure-gfm/tourismhist-1.png" title="Distributions of tourism-related data from https://www.unwto.org/tourism-data/international-tourism-and-covid-19. In grey are the subset of countries for which we have GVA data by sector." alt="Distributions of tourism-related data from https://www.unwto.org/tourism-data/international-tourism-and-covid-19. In grey are the subset of countries for which we have GVA data by sector." style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

<img src="p2_files/figure-gfm/ytd-1.png" title="Fit of log-normal distribution to loss-of-tourism data." alt="Fit of log-normal distribution to loss-of-tourism data." style="display: block; margin: auto;" />

### 8.1.4 Dependence on international tourism

We model ![y](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?y "y") as a function
of the share of GDP that comes from the sector. Note that the data we
have for this are biased towards high-income countries.

We write

![y\sim\text{Beta}(\alpha(u),\beta(u))](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?y%5Csim%5Ctext%7BBeta%7D%28%5Calpha%28u%29%2C%5Cbeta%28u%29%29 "y\sim\text{Beta}(\alpha(u),\beta(u))")

where ![u](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?u "u") is the fraction
of GDP coming from the Food and accommodation sector. We learn three
parameters ![p_1](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?p_1 "p_1"),
![p_2](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?p_2 "p_2") and
![p_3](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?p_3 "p_3") to best fit the
relationship between ![u](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?u "u")
and ![y](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?y "y") in countries we
have observations for:

![p_1 = \alpha(u)+\beta(u)](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?p_1%20%3D%20%5Calpha%28u%29%2B%5Cbeta%28u%29 "p_1 = \alpha(u)+\beta(u)")

![p_2u + p_3 = \frac{\alpha(u)}{\alpha(u)+\beta(u)}](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?p_2u%20%2B%20p_3%20%3D%20%5Cfrac%7B%5Calpha%28u%29%7D%7B%5Calpha%28u%29%2B%5Cbeta%28u%29%7D "p_2u + p_3 = \frac{\alpha(u)}{\alpha(u)+\beta(u)}")

Here, ![p_1](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?p_1 "p_1") controls
the variance of the distribution and
![p_2](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?p_2 "p_2") and
![p_3](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?p_3 "p_3") the linear
relationship between ![u](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?u "u")
and ![y](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?y "y"). Using an
optimisation routine in R we find
![p_1=5.93](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?p_1%3D5.93 "p_1=5.93"),
![p_2=3.66](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?p_2%3D3.66 "p_2=3.66")
and
![p_3=0.099](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?p_3%3D0.099 "p_3=0.099").
Results are shown in Figure <a href="#fig:sectortourism">6.1</a>. We use
these values as inputs for all country models.

<figure>
<img src="figures/sectortourism.png" style="width:60.0%"
alt="Figure 6.1: Predicting the percentage of tourism that comes from abroad as a function of the size of the sector. Each row represents a beta distribution whose mean is determined by the size of the sector (u). Blue points show the data we have available (grey bars in Figure ??)." />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Figure 6.1: Predicting the percentage of
tourism that comes from abroad as a function of the size of the sector.
Each row represents a beta distribution whose mean is determined by the
size of the sector (u). Blue points show the data we have available
(grey bars in Figure
<a href="#fig:tourismhist"><strong>??</strong></a>).</figcaption>
</figure>

## 8.2 Sampling sector sizes

To learn about the impacts of changes to sector sizes, we use the
following process to sample a baseline economic configuration.

1.  Sample a population distribution from all countries (within income
    group)
2.  Sample new values for the population proportions of the Food and
    accommodation services and Agricultural workforces from uniform
    distributions bounded by the limits of the dataset
3.  Scale the remaining sectors up or down proportionally to match the
    original total population size.

## 8.3 Impact of sector sizes

The distribution of people among sectors of the workforce impacts the
numbers of contacts made. In order to propagate these influences through
the model, we sample a null distribution of contacts from the generating
model and save the corresponding average number of candidate infectees
(CI, where CI
![=R_0/\beta](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?%3DR_0%2F%5Cbeta "=R_0/\beta")).
Separately, we define a distribution over
R![\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?_0 "_0"), e.g. a normal
distribution with its stated mean value and a coefficient of variation
of 0.1. (E.g. for H1N1, with mean 1.58, the standard deviation given 95%
interval {1.34, 2.04} is 0.18 which is a coefficient of variation of
0.11 (Fraser et al. 2009).) Then, for each simulation, we compute the
quantile of the CI distribution corresponding to the contacts generated,
and select the corresponding quantile from the
R![\_0](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?_0 "_0") distribution.
Shown illustratively in Figure
<a href="#fig:candidateinfectees">6.2</a>.

<figure>
<img src="figures/candidateinfectees.png" style="width:80.0%"
alt="Figure 6.2: The number of candidate infectees is mapped to the basic reproduction number R_0 via matching quantiles from the simulated null distribution (left) to the parametric distribution (right). 10, 50 and 90% quantiles shown." />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true">Figure 6.2: The number of candidate
infectees is mapped to the basic reproduction number <img
style="vertical-align:middle"
src="https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?%5Ctextstyle%20R_0" alt="R_0"
title="R_0" class="math inline" /> via matching quantiles from the
simulated null distribution (left) to the parametric distribution
(right). 10, 50 and 90% quantiles shown.</figcaption>
</figure>

## 8.4 Internet infrastructure

For each sector in each country, we have the 90% interval for the
proportion of people who can work from home from (Gottlieb et al. 2021).
We assume that the value we sample within the range is related to
internet infrastructure, so that a low value in one sector implies low
values in all sectors. We:

- Take the subset of countries in the income group (LLMIC / MIC / HIC)
- Take the minimum of the lower bounds by sector (5%)
- Take the maximum of the upper bounds by sector (95%)
- Sample from a uniform distribution between these bounds, taking the
  same quantile for each sector
- Use the same quantile again for internet coverage in computing the
  effectiveness of remote learning

### 8.4.1 Remote teaching

For the value of a year of education, we use the method of
(Psacharopoulos, Collis, and Patrinos 2021). The loss due to school
closure is

![L = \text{PV}\cdot Y\cdot \alpha\cdot r\cdot S\cdot \beta](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?L%20%3D%20%5Ctext%7BPV%7D%5Ccdot%20Y%5Ccdot%20%5Calpha%5Ccdot%20r%5Ccdot%20S%5Ccdot%20%5Cbeta "L = \text{PV}\cdot Y\cdot \alpha\cdot r\cdot S\cdot \beta")

where PV is the present value of lost earnings:

![\text{PV} =  \frac{1-(1+d)^{-n}}{d}](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?%5Ctext%7BPV%7D%20%3D%20%20%5Cfrac%7B1-%281%2Bd%29%5E%7B-n%7D%7D%7Bd%7D "\text{PV} =  \frac{1-(1+d)^{-n}}{d}")

for discount rate
![d=0.03](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?d%3D0.03 "d=0.03") and
expected number of years of work
![n=45](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?n%3D45 "n=45").
![Y](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?Y "Y") is mean annual
earnings,
![\alpha](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?%5Calpha "\alpha") is the
fraction of the year schools are closed:

![\alpha=\frac{1}{12}\sum\_{\tau=1}^{12}1-x\_{ed,\tau},](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?%5Calpha%3D%5Cfrac%7B1%7D%7B12%7D%5Csum_%7B%5Ctau%3D1%7D%5E%7B12%7D1-x_%7Bed%2C%5Ctau%7D%2C "\alpha=\frac{1}{12}\sum_{\tau=1}^{12}1-x_{ed,\tau},")

![r=0.08](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?r%3D0.08 "r=0.08") is the
rate of return for one year,
![S](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?S "S") is the total number of
students, and
![\beta](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?%5Cbeta "\beta") is the
proportion of students affected. We take
![\beta=1-0.86I](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?%5Cbeta%3D1-0.86I "\beta=1-0.86I")
to be the complement fraction of internet coverage
![I](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?I "I") (Figure
<a href="#fig:internet">6.3</a>) multiplied by 0.86, to match values for
the Philippines: it has 43% internet coverage and effectiveness of
remote education was estimated to be 37% (National Economic and
Development Authority 2021).

![Figure 6.3: Internet access by income level. World Bank data for
2019.](p2_files/figure-gfm/internet-1.png)

We model the Figure <a href="#fig:internet">6.3</a> values with Beta
distributions. For LLMICs, we have parameters 1.78 and 3.11. For MICs,
we have parameters 3.77 and 2.91. For HICs, we have parameters 9.57 and
1.39.

We estimate the average annual income per working-age adult as the total
GVA multiplied by the fraction of GVA that goes to labour divided by the
number of working-age adults. For the fraction of GVA that goes to
labour we use PWT estimates from 2011 (Figure
<a href="#fig:labsh">6.4</a>). (This correction might lead us to
underestimate the impact of education: perhaps GNI per working-age adult
is better than average income among working-age adults. E.g. suppose
Country A and Country B have the same GVA and the same number of
workers, where GVA = labour compensation + capital. And suppose Country
A splits its GVA between labour and capital with ratio 1:2, and Country
B with ratio 2:1. Then the value of education in Country B is twice that
in Country A, because we are only counting the income contribution to
the economy. If we wanted to estimate the impact on the economy, we
should use the whole GVA, not just the labour share.)

<!-- For the value of a year of education, we use results from [@Psacharopoulos2021a]. For an LIC, the cost of a lost school year is 207% of GDP. For a MIC, the cost of a lost school year is 73% of GDP. For an HIC, the cost of a lost school year is 30% of GDP. -->

![Figure 6.4: Fraction of GVA that goes to labour (PWT,
2011).](p2_files/figure-gfm/labsh-1.png)

We model these values with Beta distributions. For LLMICs, we have
parameters 5.09 and 4.51. For MICs, we have parameters 6.29 and 6.54.
For HICs, we have parameters 7.97 and 6.87.

## 8.5 Hospital capacity

![Figure 6.5: Fraction of GVA that goes to labour (PWT,
2011).](p2_files/figure-gfm/hmax-1.png)

We model these values with gamma distributions. For LLMICs, we have
parameters 1.3 and 0.05. For MICs, we have parameters 1.36 and 0.03. For
HICs, we have parameters 2.05 and 0.02.

# 9 Comparison of model results for SARS-CoV-2 (pre-Alpha) to 2020 data

Our model has not been calibrated to fit any observed economic outcomes
in general or for any specific country. However, the distributions for
the pre-Alpha profile of SARS-CoV-2 should align to some extent with
data pertaining to 2020, as many of the inputs to the model were taken
from this period.

## 9.1 GDP loss

![Figure 6.6: GDP loss: loss in 2020 as a percentage of 2019 GDP (IMF).
NB: data are annual, so the loss is for the year starting January 2020.
We would prefer to present data for April 2020 to March 2021 but these
data are unavailable for most countries. The outlier is
Guyana.](p2_files/figure-gfm/gdpdata-1.png)

![Figure 6.7: GDP loss: loss in 2020 as a percentage of 2019 GDP (IMF)
for low- and lower-middle-income countries with densities from the model
shown by strategy. NB: data are annual, so the loss is for the year
starting January 2020. We would prefer to present data for April 2020 to
March 2021 but these data are unavailable for most
countries.](p2_files/figure-gfm/gdpdatallmic-1.png)

![Figure 6.8: GDP loss: loss in 2020 as a percentage of 2019 GDP (IMF)
for upper- and lower-middle-income countries with densities from the
model shown by strategy. NB: data are annual, so the loss is for the
year starting January 2020. We would prefer to present data for April
2020 to March 2021 but these data are unavailable for most countries.
The outlier is Guyana.](p2_files/figure-gfm/gdpdatamic-1.png)

![Figure 6.9: GDP loss: loss in 2020 as a percentage of 2019 GDP (IMF)
for high-income countries with densities from the model shown by
strategy. NB: data are annual, so the loss is for the year starting
January 2020. We would prefer to present data for April 2020 to March
2021 but these data are unavailable for most
countries.](p2_files/figure-gfm/gdpdatahic-1.png)

## 9.2 School closure

![Figure 6.10: Extent of school closure. Horizontal lines (one per
country) show the duration of the first year spent with schools
partially closed. The space to the left of the line represents the
duration schools were open. The space to the right of the line
represents the duration schools were closed.
(UNESCO)](p2_files/figure-gfm/schooldata-1.png)

## 9.3 Value of lives lost

![Figure 6.11: Valued loss of life, using IHME estimates (“cumulative
deaths”) for the first year of accumulated deaths. The value of a
statistical life used is 160 times GDP per capita. (This means that a
0.625% mortality rate is worth 100% of
GDP.)](p2_files/figure-gfm/lives-1.png)

# 10 Pathogen profiles

## 10.1 Parameters from Pandemic Potential, plus seven P2 profiles

![Profiles from the game Pandemic
Potential](figures/pandemicprofiles.png)

![Profiles made using distribution from
game](figures/pathogenprofilessynth.png)

![Intensity and frequency of extreme novel epidemics, Marani et al.,
PNAS, 2021](figures/marani2021.png)

## 10.2 Infection-hospitalisation rate (IHR)

![IHR by age for seven P2 pathogen profiles](figures/trainingihr.png)

![Posterior samples for seven P2 pathogen IHR
profiles](figures/pathogenplot.png)

![Posterior distributions for IHR smooths](figures/pairsplot.png)

![New IHR samples for synthetic pathogens](figures/samplelogplot.png)

## 10.3 Hospital-fatality rate (HFR)

![HFR by age for seven P2 pathogen profiles](figures/traininghfr.png)

![Posterior samples for seven P2 pathogen HFR
profiles](figures/pathogenplothfr.png)

![Posterior distributions for HFR smooths](figures/pairsplothfr.png)

![New HFR samples for synthetic pathogens](figures/samplelogplothfr.png)

# 11 Population health

From the Mexico BMI work, we can model disease transition rates as
depending on population mean BMI. There are data available for many
countries (though some are very old).

We could use a linear model with boundaries beyond which there is no
further change. The range in population mean BMI in the Mexico scenarios
(excluding the no-obesity scenario) was 26.9 to 28.9. Therefore we could
extrapolate to 25.9 and 29.9, and assume fixed after that?

Writing relative risk
![RR\_{a,t} \sim \mathcal{N}(m\_{a,t}\cdot \text{BMI} + c\_{a,t},\sigma\_{a,t}^2)](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?RR_%7Ba%2Ct%7D%20%5Csim%20%5Cmathcal%7BN%7D%28m_%7Ba%2Ct%7D%5Ccdot%20%5Ctext%7BBMI%7D%20%2B%20c_%7Ba%2Ct%7D%2C%5Csigma_%7Ba%2Ct%7D%5E2%29 "RR_{a,t} \sim \mathcal{N}(m_{a,t}\cdot \text{BMI} + c_{a,t},\sigma_{a,t}^2)")
for age groups ![a](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?a "a") and
transitions ![t](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?t "t"):

| Age group | Transition      | ![m](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?m "m") | ![c](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?c "c") | ![\sigma](https://latex.codecogs.com/png.latex?%5Csigma "\sigma") |
|:----------|:----------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 20-64     | Infection       | 0.040                                            | -0.030                                           | 0.0016                                                            |
| 20-64     | Hospitalisation | 0.13                                             | -0.092                                           | 0.0054                                                            |
| 20-64     | Death           | 0.133                                            | -0.096                                           | 0.018                                                             |
| 65 plus   | Infection       | 0.011                                            | -0.0070                                          | 0.0019                                                            |
| 65 plus   | Hospitalisation | 0.063                                            | -0.048                                           | 0.0060                                                            |
| 65 plus   | Death           | 0.027                                            | -0.022                                           | 0.012                                                             |

    `stat_bin()` using `bins = 30`. Pick better value with `binwidth`.

![](p2_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png)<!-- -->

# 12 Hospital fatality rate

<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7685049/>

Mean (min, max)

|                              | LIC             | LMIC            | UMIC              | HIC                |
|------------------------------|:----------------|:----------------|:------------------|:-------------------|
| ACBs per hundred thousand    | 425             | 439 (334, 613)  | 424.75 (210, 866) | 402.32 (190, 1119) |
| ICU bed per hundred thousand | 6.44 (0.03, 65) | 2.05 (0.03, 15) | 9.23 (0.16, 57)   | 12.79 (1.8, 86)    |

In regards to World Bank Income Regions, low-income regions had a mean
of 6.44 ICU bed/100,000 (maximum = 65, minimum = 0.03, range = 64.97, SD
= 19.45), lower middle-income regions had a mean of 2.05 ICU
beds/100,000 (maximum = 15, minimum = 0.03, range = 14.97, SD = 3.54),
upper middle-income regions had a mean of 9.23 ICU beds/100,000 (maximum
= 57, minimum = 0.16, range = 56.84, SD = 13.60) and high-income regions
had a mean of 12.79 ICU beds/100,000 (maximum = 86, minimum = 1.8, range
= 84.2, SD = 14.57).
